before we dive into creating everything entirely from scratch.
I want to talk about the procedural textures that are
included as a shaded note already specifically about noises,
textures like checker break gradient or wave are
nice to generate a texture quickly and easily.
But they are also very limited
And in this course I want to focus on the very fundamentals
and how you can replace these textures with your own custom months.
In your workflow you will see that some of these textures are easily
recreated using the methods that I'm
showing throughout this course and personally I
find it to be more convenient to build my own custom textures with
exactly the functionality that I need no
unnecessary overhead and no missing features.
Procedural textures that I do use all the time though are noise textures.
They expose random functionality that is very useful for
procedural texture ring and much harder to achieve.
Using only the other and shader notes.
Noises are the easiest way to introduce some interesting
variations and more organic based patterns into procedural shakers.
But there could be a whole different
course only about the different noise textures,
how they work when to use which one and all the different ways to combine them
here.
I want to outline the basics and show a few examples
of how we use different ones in the example scene later on
the noise simply titled Noise texture is based on a Perlin Noise.
That is a very basic but extremely versatile noise texture to get
organic patterns that look random besides the scale of the overall texture,
you can control the detail level of the noise to see a bit better what that does.
That may just plug in the X coordinate into the vector input.
Now we see the profile of the noise along
one axis and as I increase the detailed parameter,
the size of the peaks and valleys gets smaller but
the overall shape stays more or less the same.
That is achieved by using another Perlin noise with a
different scale for each level of detail called an octave,
knowing that it should make sense that this parameter
drastically influences the performance of the noise texture note.
So try and make it only as high as necessary as you can see here putting it as high
as the maximum of 16 has only a marginal
difference compared to half of the levels of eight.
That is as far on a technical level as I want to go here.
But it can be useful to have an idea of how these things work under the hood.
Then you have the distortion parameter that warps the texture and gives
it a little bit more of an interesting and less a regular look
blender has changed a bit since initially making this video.
So I quickly want to interject and talk about
the roughness parameter that the noise texture has.
Now
it is a measure of how much influence each level of detail has on the texture.
So if I drag the slider all the way down to zero, the detail has no influence at all
and if I drag it all the way to one,
each level of detail has the same importance
and that makes everything look less smooth.
This is a very nice functionality to adjust
the ratio between high and low frequency detail
from the outputs. We have been looking at the simple value map
but the note also returns a color that gives you essentially just
three different Perlin noise is in the container of a color output.
It is interesting to note that the red channel of this color is the same as
the value output fact and if you use the color to drive a value input,
remember that the luminosity is used for the conversion which creates
a different noise and might not be what you want.
As you can see in the profile view of the graph,
the values that this noise creates range
between zero and one and are centered around
0.5 most values are around the center and only few are close to 01.
So keep that in mind when you're working with the noise.
The irregular Perlin noise is the go to
noise to generate variations and organic based textures procedurally
and it can be used to achieve a very broad spectrum of looks in the example seen.
Almost every one of the shakers has this noise texture incorporated in some way
either as a base pattern itself or just
to support other structures by including a variation.
Benoit is another very useful type of noise that looks entirely
different from the Perlin noise that we've seen and thus combined.
They already offer a very broad range of different looks and applications.
The board noise essentially partitions a surface into random selves by using
scattered points and grew up in the space by the closest point
detection note offers a couple of
useful outputs that have different applications.
The distance to these cells origin point,
a random color output for each cell and the position to
each cell's origin point based on the input coordinate map,
there are a bunch of useful parameters to choose how
these cells are defined and the texture is generated.
I'm not going over all different combinations of settings.
There is a lot to play around with some settings that
I do want to point out though are the smooth,
have one option to soften the edges of the
cells which makes the texture much more organic.
And then the distance to edge option, which sets all the cell walls to zero,
enabling you to isolate the edges.
Using the randomness slider,
you can always dial in how randomly these cells are distributed,
leaving you with simple cube or square shaped cells
naturally The varnai texture is useful when you
want to create some sort of cellular texture
like skin and also for structures like cracks.
Just as the noise texture node.
The Musgrave noise is based on parallel noise but it
has a lot more parameters which makes it both highly flexible
but also more complex to handle the scale and detail
parameter regular the same as for the regular noise texture.
The other parameters and different types control the different
layers of detail and how they are combined.
I will not go into more detail on the settings of this
node as there are so many different combinations of parameters and options,
creating very different results.
If you are interested in the actual specific function of each of
these parameters recommend looking them up in the blender manual page.
The main use case for the Musgrave texture is usually generating
terrain but due to its high flexibility and fractal nature,
it can be used to generate a broad variety of noises.
For example just a specific high frequency noise.
The white noise texture is a noise texture that is
more a functional node than it is an actual texture.
What I mean by that is that it
returns a different random value for every possible input
and there is no connection between them whatsoever.
That is different to the Perlin noise
as the Perlin noise is not totally random but rather still has smooth gradients.
So just using it like this with an actual
coordinate map as inputs does not really make sense.
But the white noise is incredibly useful when you want to have a random value
for individual cells of a texture or get a random value for a seed input.
For example,
the revolutionary texture as you have seen comes
with a built in random value per cell.
But what we can also do is connect the position
output of the veterinary texture to a white noise.
That creates individual random values as each
side has a different position vector.
The random values that the white noise returns
are uniformly distributed between zero and 1.
So every value in that range is equally probable
and the average is 0.5 since blender 2.83.
The white noise texture also has a color output which is
nice to receive three independent random values at the same time.
You can directly use them as a color or split them with a separate rgb note
you have probably noticed the option to change the number of dimensions.
Each noises generated with.
The options range from one dimension to four dimensions.
That means that with 40 you can include an
additional coordinate parameter on top of the X,
Y, Z coordinates that input just pops up as an additional parameter called W
The parameter could be anything. What essentially does is for different values.
It returns a different noise.
But just as the noises smooth along the axes in
three D space when you're using the 40 Virgin,
the noise changes smoothly along that fourth axis as well.
You can use that for example to animate
the noise by animating this parameter over time
But in general nothing is special about this 4th dimension.
It has just the same properties as each one
of the three parameters contained in the vector input.
That is an important thing to point out here,
going into the other direction and decreasing the number of dimensions to to
just ignores the zet component of the vector and on the one D.
Setting the coordinate input is reduced to only the w.
Using only a two dimensional texture version for a surface
Can be beneficial.
As I pointed out earlier, for example with a voluntary texture in 3D space,
it is impossible to achieve evenly thick cell walls as the points used to generate.
The texture can be spread above and below the surface and generate these artifacts.
So switching it actually to two D.
Allows for these nice evenly thick edges because
now all points are sitting on the same level
of course.
That only works with a two dimensional coordinate map
like movies or a flat xy plane like this.
one last thing in general about procedural noises,
although they are giving a random impression
on their own.
These noises have a very distinct look and they still have to go
a long way to look natural to make up a realistic shader.
The trick is hiding that a textures procedural and that can be difficult.
What I recommend is to combine multiple noises
to achieve what you're looking for and I
will show a couple of techniques to do
that throughout the following chapters of this course.